Add 24.11 Release Notes (#679)
stackabletech/documentation: modules/ROOT/pages/release-notes.adoc

  This behavior was triggered by different situations, such as when the operator was restarted.
* Trino, Spark, HBase, Airflow: The https://github.com/stackabletech/issues/issues/548[issues] where config and environment variable overrides did not work consistently have now been fixed.
* The cluster domain (default `cluster.local`) which caused problems in non-default cluster setups can now be configured in all operators.
  Either set the ENV variable `KUBERNETES_CLUSTER_DOMAIN` or the helm value `kubernetesClusterDomain` during installation as described in xref:guides:kubernetes-cluster-domain.adoc[Configuring the Kubernetes cluster domain].
* Apache Airflow: In release 24.7 Airflow did not propagate git credentials correctly to the gitsync containers.
  This has now been corrected and works for both celery- and kubernetes workers.
* Operators now do not stop reconciling existing clusters if one of the https://github.com/stackabletech/issues/issues/211[cluster objects cannot be deserialized].
* Apache HBase: The operator now does not https://github.com/stackabletech/hbase-operator/pull/584[ignore the `hbaseRootdir` config property at role level].

> * Apache Kakfa: The bootstrap Kafka service is now included in https://github.com/stackabletech/kafka-operator/pull/741[certificate SANs].

Author: ```suggestion
* Apache Kafka: The bootstrap Kafka service is now included in https://github.com/stackabletech/kafka-operator/pull/741[certificate SANs].
```

* Support has been added for customizing `sAMAccountName` generation in secret operator.
* The Stackable Secret Operator now requests permission to read Listeners, which is required to provision secrets for listener volumes with the `listeners.stackable.tech/listener-name` annotation.
* The RSA key length for generated key pairs can now be customized to 2048, 3072 or 4096 bits. The default is 2048 bits.

Listener::

* The Stackable Operator for Kafka now uses the Stackable Listener Operator, allowing connectivity to be customized.
* Listeners can now be configured to use either IP addresses or fully qualified domain names (FQDNs).

Dependencies::

Apache HBase: The hadoop-azure module was added to the image and is contained in the classpath.
This makes it possible to use the Azure Data Lake Storage Gen2 (ADLS) instead of HDFS.
See the xref:hbase:usage-guide/adls.adoc[usage guide] for detailed information.

Operations::

The Stackable Operator for HDFS now supports upgrading existing HDFS installations.
However, this process requires some manual intervention as described in xref:hdfs:usage-guide/upgrading.adoc[Upgrading HDFS].

> Misc::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Miscellaneous::
```

Logging::

* Apache NiFi: The default size of ephemeral EmptyDir Volumes used to store log files before aggregation has been increased from 33 MiB to 500 MiB.
  Additionally the interval in which Logback checks if the maximum log file size has been reached has been reduced from 60 seconds to 5 seconds.
* Apache NiFi: the create-reporting-task Job (and podOverrides on that Job) can now be disabled.

Monitoring::

https://github.com/prometheus/jmx_exporter[JMX Exporter] is a tool which allows us to expose JMX metrics as Prometheus metrics.
It is used by the following products: Hadoop, HBase, Hive, Kafka, Spark, Trino and ZooKeeper.
In the previous SDP release (24.7) we upgraded JMX Exporter from 0.20 to 1.0.1.
Unfortunately version 1.0.1 has a severe performance degradation which has been https://github.com/prometheus/jmx_exporter/pull/1009[fixed upstream] but is not yet released.
This SDP release (24.11) contains a fixed version bringing performance back to normal levels.

Listener::

The `ListenerClass.spec.serviceAnnotations` are now correctly propagated to created Service objects.

> Misc::

Reviewer: Formal way. Or just go `CRDs`?
```suggestion
Miscellaneous::
```

* `1.31`
* `1.30`
* `1.29`

These Kubernetes versions are no longer supported:

* `1.26`
* `1.25` as we removed internal forks required to support Kubernetes `1.25` and below.
  This includes OpenShift `4.12`, which is using Kubernetes `1.25`.

=== Supported OpenShift versions

This release is available in the RedHat Certified Operator Catalog for the following OpenShift versions:

* `4.15`
* `4.14`

These OpenShift versions are no longer supported:

* `4.13`
* `4.12`

=== Breaking changes

Of the changes mentioned above, the following are breaking (or could lead to breaking behaviour), and you will need to adapt your existing CRDs accordingly:

==== Kafka operator

* Existing services will be migrated to the new format. Clients will need to re-read settings from the discovery configmap.
* Kafka is now only accessible from within the Kubernetes cluster by default. Set listener classes manually to expose it to the outside world (again).
* To complete an upgrade to this kafka-operator, all existing Kafka StatefulSets must be deleted manually. This will cause some downtime.

.Breaking changes details
[%collapsible]
====
* `spec.blah`: Describe a change.

> ====

Author: @nightkr, @maltesander found some missing breaking changes from https://github.com/stackabletech/kafka-operator/pull/443

Are you able to please revise the wording to answer:
- What is the new format?
- What clients need to do exactly (restart, I assume)
- How to set the listenerClass manually (can be added to the collapsible section)
- Example of the upgrade process (where in the process does the STS get deleted, and how? cascade=false?)

Reviewer 2: Existing Kafka clusters will need to be migrated to using the Listener Operator. This is done by deleting the Kafka StatefulSet after the new Stackable Operator for Kafka has been installed, by running `kubectl delete StatefulSet --selector=app.kubernetes.io/managed-by=kafka.stackable.tech_kafkacluster`. The operator will then recreate it. However, note that the Kafka cluster will be unavailable during the procedure.

After the upgrade, Kafka clusters will default to only being accessible from *inside* the Kubernetes cluster. To make the cluster accessible from the outside, set `KafkaCluster.spec.brokers.config.bootstrapListenerClass: external-stable` and `KafkaCluster.spec.brokers.config.brokerListenerClass: external-unstable`. However, note that this upgrade will randomize the address that users will have to connect to, so any external clients must re-read it from the discovery configuration after the upgrade has been completed.

Reviewer 2: The one thing I'm unsure about is that paragraph 2 needs to be handled before 1 if applicable, but 1 sets up some of the background for why it's required. Maybe it would make sense to reorder that...

Reviewer 2: Oh right, that delete should be with `--all-namespaces`.

In theory you could do the delete with `--cascade=orphan`, but that's going to cause the StatefulSet controller to try to update the Pods in-place instead of doing a rollout, which is going to fail since Pods are largely immutable. You would then need to delete the pods manually one by one.

Security::

* The Stackable Data Platform now supports provisioning TLS certificates using https://cert-manager.io/[cert-manager].
* Added support for customizing `sAMAccountName` generation in secret operator.
* The Stackable Secret Operator now requests permission to read Listeners, which is required to provision secrets for listener volumes with the `listeners.stackable.tech/listener-name` annotation.
* The RSA key length for generated key pairs now can be customized to 2048, 3072 and 4096 bits. The default is 2048 bit.

Listener::

* The Stackable Operator for Kafka now uses the Stackable Listener Operator, allowing connectivity to be customized.
* Listeners can now be configured to use either IP addresses or fully qualified domain names (FQDNs).

Dependencies::

Apache HBase: The hadoop-azure module was added to the image and is contained in the classpath.
This makes it possible to use the Azure Data Lake Storage Gen2 (ADLS) instead of HDFS.
See the xref:hbase:usage-guide/adls.adoc[usage guide] for detailed information.

Operations::

The Stackable Operator for HDFS now supports upgrading existing HDFS installations.

> However, this process requires some manual intervention as described https://docs.stackable.tech/home/nightly/hdfs/usage-guide/upgrading/[here].

Author: Doc links must use xrefs so they point to the right release docs (instead of following nightly as it changes).

Author: Maybe this?

```suggestion
However, this process requires some manual intervention as described in xref:hbase:usage-guide/upgrading.adoc[Upgrading HDFS].
```

Author: Also look at other instances.

Misc::

* Apache NiFi: Permit users to configure allowed hosts when NiFi is running behind a proxy.
  The proxy host check is now disabled by default.
  See documentation xref:nifi:usage_guide/security#host-header-check[here].
* Apache Airflow: Allow custom arbitrary python code in `webserver_config.py`.
* Apache Superset: Allow custom arbitrary python code in `superset_config.py`.

Images::

Support the `restricted-v2` SecurityContextConstraint (SCC) in OpenShift.
Stackable currently defaults to the `nonroot-v2` SCC but we plan on migrating to the `restricted-v2` SCC in the future.

* Our Docker images now exclusively make use of numeric user IDs in `USER` statements allowing the use of `securityContext.runAsNonRoot`
* The group id of all files relevant to our products is now set to `0`.
  This allows the images to be run with an arbitrary user as every container user will always belong to the root group (`0`).
  This is required on OpenShift when migrating to the `restricted-v2` SCC.

=== Platform improvements

Vulnerabilities::

More than 142 CVEs were fixed in the Stackable product images.
This includes 11 critical and 55 high-severity CVEs.

Authorization::

> * The performance of the https://docs.stackable.tech/home/stable/hdfs/usage-guide/security.html#\_authorization[OPA Authorizer] has been greatly improved.

Author: ```suggestion
* The performance of the xref:hdfs:usage-guide/security.html#_authorization[OPA Authorizer] has been greatly improved.
```

We just have to check if the link gets fumbled.

>   This _can_ be a breaking change so please make sure to read the hdfs-utils https://github.com/stackabletech/hdfs-utils/releases/tag/v0.4.0[release notes] for details.

Author: This still displays strangely:

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/4647d6de-56f7-486f-b94f-5c5f3bda347e)

> * The User Info Fetcher HTTP API has been replaced with a Rego library. Please see https://docs.stackable.tech/home/nightly/opa/usage-guide/user-info-fetcher#_user_info_fetcher_api[user-info-fetcher API] for more information.

Author: ```suggestion
* The User Info Fetcher HTTP API has been replaced with a Rego library. Please see xref:opa:usage-guide/user-info-fetcher#_user_info_fetcher_api[user-info-fetcher API] for more information.
```

==== Using Helm

=== Known issues

////

== Release 24.11

=== New platform features

Authentication::

In this release we introduced several authentication mechanisms in different products:

* Apache Airflow: https://github.com/stackabletech/airflow-operator/issues/337[OIDC support]
* Apache Kafka: https://github.com/stackabletech/kafka-operator/issues/655[Kerberos support]
* Apache NiFi: https://github.com/stackabletech/nifi-operator/issues/633[OIDC support]

Security::

* The Stackable Data Platform now supports provisioning TLS certificates using https://cert-manager.io/[cert-manager].

> * Added support for customizing `sAMAccountName` generation in secret operator.

Reviewer 3: Make this a sentence like the other elements in the list:
```suggestion
* Support has been added for customizing `sAMAccountName` generation in secret operator.
```

* The Stackable Secret Operator now requests permission to read Listeners, which is required to provision secrets for listener volumes with the `listeners.stackable.tech/listener-name` annotation.

> * The RSA key length for generated key pairs now can be customized to 2048, 3072 and 4096 bits. The default is 2048 bit.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* The RSA key length for generated key pairs can now be customized to 2048, 3072 or 4096 bits. The default is 2048 bits.
```

Misc::

* Apache NiFi: Permit users to configure allowed hosts when NiFi is running behind a proxy.
  The proxy host check is now disabled by default.
  See documentation xref:nifi:usage_guide/security#host-header-check[here].
* Apache Airflow: Allow custom arbitrary python code in `webserver_config.py`.
* Apache Superset: Allow custom arbitrary python code in `superset_config.py`.

Images::

Support the `restricted-v2` SecurityContextConstraint (SCC) in OpenShift.
Stackable currently defaults to the `nonroot-v2` SCC but we plan on migrating to the `restricted-v2` SCC in the future.

* Our Docker images now exclusively make use of numeric user IDs in `USER` statements allowing the use of `securityContext.runAsNonRoot`
* The group id of all files relevant to our products is now set to `0`.
  This allows the images to be run with an arbitrary user as every container user will always belong to the root group (`0`).
  This is required on OpenShift when migrating to the `restricted-v2` SCC.

=== Platform improvements

Vulnerabilities::

More than 142 CVEs were fixed in the Stackable product images.
This includes 11 critical and 55 high-severity CVEs.

Authorization::

> * The performance of the xref:hdfs:usage-guide/security.adoc#_authorization[OPA Authorizer] has been greatly improved.

Author: Escape the thing to fix this:

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ddbeafe7-ea61-45f0-961b-a817ff726862)

```suggestion
* The performance of the xref:hdfs:usage-guide/security.adoc#\_authorization[OPA Authorizer] has been greatly improved.
```

> * The performance of the xref:hdfs:usage-guide/security.adoc#\_authorization[OPA Authorizer] has been greatly improved.

Reviewer: Two idiots... https://github.com/stackabletech/documentation/pull/679#discussion_r1858463526 :D

>   This _can_ be a breaking change so please make sure to read the hdfs-utils https://github.com/stackabletech/hdfs-utils/releases/tag/v0.4.0[release notes] for details.

Author: I am done this this!

```suggestion
  This can in some cases be a breaking change so please make sure to read the hdfs-utils https://github.com/stackabletech/hdfs-utils/releases/tag/v0.4.0[release notes] for details.
```

>   This <em>can</em> be a breaking change so please make sure to read the hdfs-utils https://github.com/stackabletech/hdfs-utils/releases/tag/v0.4.0[release notes] for details.

Author: ```suggestion
  This _can_ be a breaking change so please make sure to read the hdfs-utils https://github.com/stackabletech/hdfs-utils/releases/tag/v0.4.0[release notes] for details.
```

>   This can in some cases be a breaking change so please make sure to read the hdfs-utils https://github.com/stackabletech/hdfs-utils/releases/tag/v0.4.0[release notes] for details.

Reviewer: This is related to HDFS, which is not clear to me in this snippet.

Author: Fixed in cd80f37

* The User Info Fetcher HTTP API has been replaced with a Rego library. Please see xref:opa:usage-guide/user-info-fetcher#_user_info_fetcher_api[user-info-fetcher API] for more information.

Logging::

> Apache NiFi: The ephemeral EmptyDir Volumes used to store log files before being aggregated have their size increased from a default of 33 MiB to 500 MiB.

Reviewer 3: We have mixed bullet/non-bullet lists, which is fine if we only have one element in a list. Is this one element or two?
```suggestion
Apache NiFi: The default size of ephemeral EmptyDir Volumes used to store log files before aggregation has been increased from 33 MiB to 500 MiB.
```

> Additionally the interval in which Logback checks if the maximum log file size has been reached was lowered from 60 seconds to 5 seconds.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Additionally the interval in which Logback checks if the maximum log file size has been reached has been reduced from 60 seconds to 5 seconds.
```

> Apache NiFi: Support disabling the create-reporting-task Job as well as podOverrides on that Job.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Apache NiFi: the create-reporting-task Job (and podOverrides on that Job) can now be disabled.
```

> Apache NiFi: the create-reporting-task Job (and podOverrides on that Job) can now be disabled.

Reviewer: This does not appear as a new "bullet" point in the preview:
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/77787fcd-c644-4ba6-b8db-d1d21ae4db32)

Author: Fixed in: 83e56c0234e3ed3233b12052dacf043cb17232d5

Monitoring::

https://github.com/prometheus/jmx_exporter[JMX Exporter] is a tool which allows us to expose JMX metrics as Prometheus metrics.
It is used by the following products: Hadoop, HBase, Hive, Kafka, Spark, Trino and ZooKeeper.
In the previous SDP release (24.7) we upgraded JMX Exporter from 0.20 to 1.0.1.
Unfortunately version 1.0.1 has a severe performance degradation which has been https://github.com/prometheus/jmx_exporter/pull/1009[fixed upstream] but is not yet released.
This SDP release (24.11) contains a fixed version bringing performance back to normal levels.

Listener::

The `ListenerClass.spec.serviceAnnotations` are now correctly propagated to created Service objects.

Misc::

The size of the operator deployed CRDs was reduced significantly (see: https://github.com/stackabletech/issues/issues/627[stackabletech/issues#627]).

Bug fixes::

> * Apache Spark Operator: Ensure Spark applications are submitted only once.

Reviewer: For consistency.
```suggestion
* Apache Spark: Ensure Spark applications are submitted only once.
```

  Reconciling applications after the corresponding Job objects have been recycled doesn't lead to the creation of new Job objects.
  This behavior was triggered by different situations, such as when the operator was restarted.

> * Trino, Spark, HBase, Airflow: These used to have https://github.com/stackabletech/issues/issues/548[issues] where config and environment variable overrides would not always work as expected, this has now been fixed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Trino, Spark, HBase, Airflow: The https://github.com/stackabletech/issues/issues/548[issues] where config and environment variable overrides did not work consistently have now been fixed.
```

* Apache Airflow: In release 24.7 Airflow did not propagate git credentials correctly to the gitsync containers.
  This has now been corrected and works for both celery- and kubernetes workers.
* Operators now do not stop reconciling existing clusters if one of the https://github.com/stackabletech/issues/issues/211[cluster objects cannot be deserialized].
* Apache HBase: The operator now does not https://github.com/stackabletech/hbase-operator/pull/584[ignore the `hbaseRootdir` config property at role level].
* Apache Kakfa: The bootstrap Kafka service is now included in https://github.com/stackabletech/kafka-operator/pull/741[certificate SANs].
* Trino: Do not print credentials to STDOUT during startup.

=== Platform deprecations

Commons::

Pod Enrichment is now deprecated, and will be removed in the next release.
Once removed, the SDP will no longer set any `enrichment.stackable.tech/` annotations on Pods.

=== Product versions

As with previous SDP releases, many product images have been updated to their latest versions.

> The LTS version has in many cases also been adjusted in line with our https://docs.stackable.tech/home/stable/policies[support policy].

Author: ```suggestion
The LTS version has in many cases also been adjusted in line with our xref:ROOT:policies.adoc[support policy].
```

* Open Policy Agent: https://github.com/stackabletech/opa-operator/pull/616[0.67.1]
* Trino: https://github.com/stackabletech/trino-operator/pull/638[455]
* Apache Spark: https://github.com/stackabletech/spark-k8s-operator/pull/459[3.5.2 (LTS)]

==== Deprecated versions

The following product versions are deprecated and will be removed in a later release:

* Apache Airflow: 2.9.2
* Apache Druid: 26.0.0
* Open Policy Agent: 0.66.0

==== Removed versions

The following product versions are no longer supported (although images for released product versions remain available https://repo.stackable.tech/#browse/browse:docker:v2%2Fstackable[here]):

* Apache Airflow: 2.8.4, 2.8.1, 2.6.3
* Apache Druid: 28.0.1
* Apache Kafka: 3.6.2, 3.6.1, 3.4.1
* Apache NiFi: 2.0.0-M4, 1.25.0, 1.21.0
* Open Policy Agent: 0.61.0
* Trino: 442, 414
* Apache Spark: 3.4.3, 3.4.2
* Apache Superset: 3.1.3, 3.1.0, 2.1.3
* Apache ZooKeeper: 3.8.4

=== stackablectl

* Bump Rust dependencies to fix critical vulnerability in quinn-proto, see https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-vr26-jcq5-fjj8[CVE-2024-45311] (https://github.com/stackabletech/stackable-cockpit/pull/318).

> * We now provide additional completions for Nushell and Elvish, support using SOCK5 and HTTP proxies, and have improved the sorting of release versions.

Reviewer: Is this really in the release? I remember it was merged after...

Author: It is in the stackablectl-24.11.1 release (it has similar release numbering, but is independent - yet still in these release notes :shrug: ).

> * We now provide additional completions for Nushell and Elvish, support using SOCK5 and HTTP proxies, and improved the sorting of release versions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* We now provide additional completions for Nushell and Elvish, support using SOCK5 and HTTP proxies, and have improved the sorting of release versions.
```

=== Supported Kubernetes versions

This release supports the following Kubernetes versions:

* `1.31`
* `1.30`
* `1.29`

These Kubernetes versions are no longer supported:

* `1.26`
* `1.25` as we removed internal forks required to support Kubernetes `1.25` and below.
  This includes OpenShift `4.12`, which is using Kubernetes `1.25`.

=== Supported OpenShift versions

This release is available in the RedHat Certified Operator Catalog for the following OpenShift versions:

* `4.15`
* `4.14`

These OpenShift versions are no longer supported:

* `4.13`
* `4.12`

=== Breaking changes

==== Listener operator

BREAKING: All ListenerClasses now default to using DNS hostnames, previously NodePort ListenerClasses (such as external-unstable) would use IP addresses.

> Hence, all Nodes must now have resolvable hostnames, or the NodePort ListenerClasses must be configured to set `.spec.preferredAddressType: IP`.

Reviewer: I will check again, it feels like one breaking change is not enough :D ?

Author: Hmm yeah, sure there is more?

Please also see the reworked _Breaking changes_ section:
https://github.com/stackabletech/documentation/pull/679/files#r1858490497

Reviewer: did not find more, will resolve this.

> ==== Listener operator
> 
> BREAKING: All ListenerClasses now default to using DNS hostnames, previously NodePort ListenerClasses (such as external-unstable) would use IP addresses.
> Hence, all Nodes must now have resolvable hostnames, or the NodePort ListenerClasses must be configured to set `.spec.preferredAddressType: IP`.

Author: Can someone help me rework this to the same _Breaking changes_ style as in the previous release notes?

_Since there is only one item, I have removed the unordered list_.

```suggestion
Of the changes mentioned above, the following are breaking (or could lead to breaking behaviour), and you will need to adapt your existing CRDs accordingly:

==== Listener operator

All ListenerClasses now default to using Fully Qualified Domain Names (FQDNs). 
Previously, NodePort ListenerClasses (such as external-unstable) would use the IP addresses.

All Nodes must now have resolvable hostnames, or the NodePort ListenerClasses must be configured with `spec.preferredAddressType: IP`.

.Breaking changes details
[%collapsible]
====
* `spec.preferredAddressType`: This now defaults to `HostnameConservative`, but can be set to `Hostname` or `IP`.
====
```

Author: Maybe we also want to link to the PR?

https://github.com/stackabletech/listener-operator/pull/244

Author: I couldn't find a suitable place to link the PR, and I don't think it is too useful as a link in the release notes.

helm install --wait hbase-operator stackable-stable/hbase-operator --version 24.11.0
helm install --wait hdfs-operator stackable-stable/hdfs-operator --version 24.11.0
helm install --wait hive-operator stackable-stable/hive-operator --version 24.11.0
helm install --wait kafka-operator stackable-stable/kafka-operator --version 24.11.0
helm install --wait listener-operator stackable-stable/listener-operator --version 24.11.0
helm install --wait hello-world-operator stackable-stable/hello-world-operator --version 24.11.0
helm install --wait nifi-operator stackable-stable/nifi-operator --version 24.11.0
helm install --wait opa-operator stackable-stable/opa-operator --version 24.11.0
helm install --wait secret-operator stackable-stable/secret-operator --version 24.11.0
helm install --wait spark-k8s-operator stackable-stable/spark-k8s-operator --version 24.11.0
helm install --wait superset-operator stackable-stable/superset-operator --version 24.11.0
helm install --wait trino-operator stackable-stable/trino-operator --version 24.11.0
helm install --wait zookeeper-operator stackable-stable/zookeeper-operator --version 24.11.0
----

> === Known issues

Author: I still think we should mention that upgrading to NiFi 2.0.0 is not possible yet (due to some processors being renamed or having different class paths which cannot be changed from the UI).

Reviewer: Hmm i think it **should** be possible starting from 1.27.0? Thats at least what they state in the nifi docs.
I would rather mention renamed processors (and keep an eye out for updating flows using this), instead of stating it does not work at all?

Reviewer 4: I would second @maltesander. Some processors will break, but I'd say that's a customer problem and there is probably nothing we can (and will) do ^^
I fear all we can do is point to something like https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/NIFI/Migrating+Deprecated+Components+and+Features+for+2.0.0#MigratingDeprecatedComponentsandFeaturesfor2.0.0-InvokeHTTP

Author: I mean, it technically works, but since processors are renamed, they flow starts in a broken state which cannot easily be fixed - so I think it is worth warning people about it anyway.

Author: Done in 13342b71df4ce5c0646f3adeac09feb6938bfb87

* The Apache NiFi operator currently cannot share an https://github.com/stackabletech/nifi-operator/issues/716[OIDC AuthenticationClass with other products].
  This is due to an inconsistent implementation in the NiFi operator.

> * Apache NiFi: For the experimental NiFi version `2.0.0`, the `PrometheusReportingTask`, use to activate a Prometheus metrics endpoint, was removed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Apache NiFi: For the experimental NiFi version `2.0.0`, the `PrometheusReportingTask` (which was used to activate a Prometheus metrics endpoint) has been removed.
```

>   NiFi now has its own API to directly access metrics. In contrast to previous versions, the metrics endpoints now requires authentication which is

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  NiFi now has its own API to directly access metrics. In contrast to previous versions, the metrics endpoints now requires authentication.
```

>   not supported by the Stackable operator for Apache NiFi in this release.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  This is not supported by the Stackable operator for Apache NiFi in this release.
```

* Added support for customizing `sAMAccountName` generation in secret operator.
* The Stackable Secret Operator now requests permission to read Listeners, which is required to provision secrets for listener volumes with the `listeners.stackable.tech/listener-name` annotation.
* The RSA key length for generated key pairs now can be customized to 2048, 3072 and 4096 bits. The default is 2048 bit.

Listener::

* The Stackable Operator for Kafka now uses the Stackable Listener Operator, allowing connectivity to be customized.
* Listeners can now be configured to use either IP addresses or fully qualified domain names (FQDNs).

Dependencies::

Apache HBase: The hadoop-azure module was added to the image and is contained in the classpath.
This makes it possible to use the Azure Data Lake Storage Gen2 (ADLS) instead of HDFS.
See the xref:hbase:usage-guide/adls.adoc[usage guide] for detailed information.

Operations::

The Stackable Operator for HDFS now supports upgrading existing HDFS installations.
However, this process requires some manual intervention as described https://docs.stackable.tech/home/nightly/hdfs/usage-guide/upgrading/[here].

> Misc::
> 
> * Apache NiFi: Permit users to configure allowed hosts when NiFi is running behind a proxy.

Author: ```suggestion
Nifi::

* Permit users to configure allowed hosts when NiFi is running behind a proxy.
* TODO: add comment about this: https://github.com/stackabletech/docker-images/pull/943

Misc::
```

Author: https://github.com/stackabletech/docker-images/pull/943 is now scheduled for 25.3

Additionally the interval in which Logback checks if the maximum log file size has been reached was lowered from 60 seconds to 5 seconds.
Apache NiFi: Support disabling the create-reporting-task Job as well as podOverrides on that Job.

Monitoring::

https://github.com/prometheus/jmx_exporter[JMX Exporter] is a tool which allows us to expose JMX metrics as Prometheus metrics.
It is used by the following products: Hadoop, HBase, Hive, Kafka, Spark, Trino and ZooKeeper.
In the previous SDP release (24.7) we upgraded JMX Exporter from 0.20 to 1.0.1.
Unfortunately version 1.0.1 has a severe performance degradation which has been https://github.com/prometheus/jmx_exporter/pull/1009[fixed upstream] but is not yet released.
This SDP release (24.11) contains a fixed version bringing performance back to normal levels.

Listener::

The `ListenerClass.spec.serviceAnnotations` are now correctly propagated to created Service objects.

Misc::

The size of the operator deployed CRDs was reduced significantly (see: https://github.com/stackabletech/issues/issues/627[stackabletech/issues#627]).

> Bug fixes::

Author: Todo: add in whatever comes out of:
- https://github.com/stackabletech/operator-rs/pull/909
- https://github.com/stackabletech/operator-rs/pull/910

Or the applicable changes that end up in the operators themselves.

Author: Added to the _Known issues_ section in 62e1943.

////

== Release 24.11

=== New / extended platform features

Improved Authentication:

In this release we introduced several authentication mechanisms in different products:

* Apache Airflow: https://github.com/stackabletech/airflow-operator/issues/337[OIDC support]
* Apache Kafka: https://github.com/stackabletech/kafka-operator/issues/655[Kerberos support]
* Apache NiFi: https://github.com/stackabletech/nifi-operator/issues/633[OIDC support]

Improved Authorization:

> * The performance of the https://docs.stackable.tech/home/stable/hdfs/usage-guide/security.html#_authorization[OPA Authorizer] has been greatly improved. This _can_ be a breaking change so please make sure to read the https://github.com/stackabletech/hdfs-utils/releases/tag/v0.4.0[release notes] of the hdfs-utils for details

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* The performance of the https://docs.stackable.tech/home/stable/hdfs/usage-guide/security.html#_authorization[OPA Authorizer] has been greatly improved. This _can_ be a breaking change so please make sure to read the hdfs-utils https://github.com/stackabletech/hdfs-utils/releases/tag/v0.4.0[release notes] for details.
```

> * The User Info Fetcher HTTP API has been replaced with a Rego library, please see https://docs.stackable.tech/home/nightly/opa/usage-guide/user-info-fetcher#_user_info_fetcher_api for more information

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* The User Info Fetcher HTTP API has been replaced with a Rego library. Please see https://docs.stackable.tech/home/nightly/opa/usage-guide/user-info-fetcher#_user_info_fetcher_api for more information
```

Monitoring:

> * In SDP 24.7 we upgraded the version of [JMX Exporter](https://github.com/prometheus/jmx_exporter) from 0.20 to 1.0.1. This is the tool which allows us to expose JMX as Prometheus metrics and is in use for Hadoop, HBase, Hive, Kafka, Spark, Trino and ZooKeeper. Unfortunately the version 1.0.1 has a severe performance degradation which has been [fixed upstream](https://github.com/prometheus/jmx_exporter/pull/1009) but is not released yet. This SDP release 24.11 contains a fixed version bringing performance back to normal levels.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* In SDP 24.7 we upgraded the version of [JMX Exporter](https://github.com/prometheus/jmx_exporter) from 0.20 to 1.0.1. This is the tool which allows us to expose JMX metrics in Prometheus and is in use for Hadoop, HBase, Hive, Kafka, Spark, Trino and ZooKeeper. Unfortunately the version 1.0.1 has a severe performance degradation which has been [fixed upstream](https://github.com/prometheus/jmx_exporter/pull/1009) but is not yet released. This SDP release 24.11 contains a fixed version bringing performance back to normal levels.
```

Security:

* The Stackable Data Platform now supports provisioning TLS certificates using cert-manager.

> * Added support for customizing sAMAccountName generation 

Reviewer 3: Is that casing correct? Should that be SamAccountName or SAMAccountName?

Reviewer: I just copied the release notes, but quick google search seems to confirm `sAMAccountName`.

Listener:

* The Stackable Operator for Kafka now uses the Stackable Listener Operator, allowing connectivity to be customized.

Misc:

> * Apache NiFi: allow users to configure allowed hosts when NiFi is running behind a proxy. The proxy host check is now turned off by default. Documentation: https://docs.stackable.tech/home/nightly/nifi/usage_guide/security#host-header-check

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Apache NiFi: permit users to configure allowed hosts when NiFi is running behind a proxy. The proxy host check is now turned off by default. Documentation: https://docs.stackable.tech/home/nightly/nifi/usage_guide/security#host-header-check
```

==== Deprecated versions

The following product versions are deprecated and will be removed in a later release:

* Apache Airflow: 2.9.2
* Apache Druid: 26.0.0
* Open Policy Agent: 0.66.0

==== Removed versions

The following product versions are no longer supported (although images for released product versions remain available https://repo.stackable.tech/#browse/browse:docker:v2%2Fstackable[here]):

* Apache Airflow: 2.8.4, 2.8.1, 2.6.3
* Apache Druid: 28.0.1
* Apache Kafka: 3.6.2, 3.6.1, 3.4.1
* Apache NiFi: 2.0.0-M4, 1.25.0, 1.21.0
* Open Policy Agent: 0.61.0
* Trino: 442, 414
* Apache Spark: 3.4.3, 3.4.2
* Apache Superset: 3.1.3, 3.1.0, 2.1.3
* Apache ZooKeeper: 3.8.4

=== stackablectl

=== Supported Kubernetes versions

This release supports the following Kubernetes versions:

* `1.31`
* `1.30`
* `1.29`

These Kubernetes versions are no longer supported:

* `1.26`
* `1.25` as we removed internal forks required to support Kubernetes `1.25` and below. This includes OpenShift `4.12`, which is using Kubernetes `1.25`.

=== Supported OpenShift versions

This release is available in the RedHat Certified Operator Catalog for the following OpenShift versions:

> * `4.15`

Reviewer 3: We are hoping to certify against - and therefore support - 4.16.

Reviewer: Yes, left it out on purpose for now, we can add once we actually tested and / or certified?

Author: Marking as resolved, added an item to https://github.com/stackabletech/issues/issues/647

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/6a5fa60e-1cca-4a1a-b222-25c381582889)

////

== Release 24.11

> === New / extended platform features

Reviewer 5: In the last release notes (for 24.7) we had a dedicated section about CVEs (and our vulnerability handling process), see [here](https://docs.stackable.tech/home/stable/release-notes/#_new_extended_platform_features).

Should we add something similar, for example by introducing a new "CVE/Security" section?

CC @dervoeti

Reviewer: Yes added lukas input https://github.com/stackabletech/documentation/pull/679/commits/7c5cf1fb2a4b1c707a99be1d4314ceb9925d7bc6

* Apache Hive: https://github.com/stackabletech/hive-operator/pull/508[4.0.0 (experimental)]
* Apache Kafka: https://github.com/stackabletech/kafka-operator/pull/753/[3.8.0]
* Apache NiFi: https://github.com/stackabletech/nifi-operator/pull/702[2.0.0 (experimental)]
* Open Policy Agent: https://github.com/stackabletech/opa-operator/pull/616[0.67.1]
* Trino: https://github.com/stackabletech/trino-operator/pull/638[455]
* Apache Spark: https://github.com/stackabletech/spark-k8s-operator/pull/459[3.5.2 (LTS)]

==== Deprecated versions

The following product versions are deprecated and will be removed in a later release:

* Apache Airflow: 2.9.2
* Apache Druid: 26.0.0
* Open Policy Agent: 0.66.0

==== Removed versions

The following product versions are no longer supported (although images for released product versions remain available https://repo.stackable.tech/#browse/browse:docker:v2%2Fstackable[here]):

* Apache Airflow: 2.8.4, 2.8.1, 2.6.3
* Apache Druid: 28.0.1
* Apache Kafka: 3.6.2, 3.6.1, 3.4.1
* Apache NiFi: 2.0.0-M4, 1.25.0, 1.21.0
* Open Policy Agent: 0.61.0
* Trino: 442, 414
* Apache Spark: 3.4.3, 3.4.2
* Apache Superset: 3.1.3, 3.1.0, 2.1.3
* Apache ZooKeeper: 3.8.4

> === stackablectl

Reviewer 5: In the stackablectl-24.11.0 release only one thing worth mentioning happened:

> Bump Rust dependencies to fix critical vulnerability in quinn-proto, see [CVE-2024-45311](https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-vr26-jcq5-fjj8) (https://github.com/stackabletech/stackable-cockpit/pull/318).

In the upcoming stackablectl-24.11.1 release, we will have better release sorting and Nushell + Elvish shell completions.

Reviewer: Thanks, added .

* Apache Airflow: https://github.com/stackabletech/airflow-operator/issues/337[OIDC support]
* Apache Kafka: https://github.com/stackabletech/kafka-operator/issues/655[Kerberos support]
* Apache NiFi: https://github.com/stackabletech/nifi-operator/issues/633[OIDC support]

Improved Authorization::

* The performance of the https://docs.stackable.tech/home/stable/hdfs/usage-guide/security.html#_authorization[OPA Authorizer] has been greatly improved. This _can_ be a breaking change so please make sure to read the hdfs-utils https://github.com/stackabletech/hdfs-utils/releases/tag/v0.4.0[release notes] for details.
* The User Info Fetcher HTTP API has been replaced with a Rego library. Please see https://docs.stackable.tech/home/nightly/opa/usage-guide/user-info-fetcher#_user_info_fetcher_api[user-info-fetcher API] for more information.

Logging::

* Apache NiFi: The ephemeral EmptyDir Volumes used to store log files before being aggregated have their size increased from a default of 33 MiB to 500 MiB. Additionally the interval in which Logback checks if the maximum log file size has been reached was lowered from 60 seconds to 5 seconds.

> Monitoring::

Reviewer: Not a fan of the headings or the resulting sorting. Started by trying to sort the features into groups, but not sure anymore. Any better ideas/input?

////

== Release 24.11

=== New / extended platform features

Vulnerabilities::

> * More than 142 CVEs were fixed in the Stackable product images. This includes 11 CVEs of critical and 55 CVEs of high severity.

Author: ```suggestion
* More than 142 CVEs were fixed in the Stackable product images. This includes 11 critical and 55 high-severity CVEs.
```

Improved Authentication::

In this release we introduced several authentication mechanisms in different products:

* Apache Airflow: https://github.com/stackabletech/airflow-operator/issues/337[OIDC support]
* Apache Kafka: https://github.com/stackabletech/kafka-operator/issues/655[Kerberos support]
* Apache NiFi: https://github.com/stackabletech/nifi-operator/issues/633[OIDC support]

Improved Authorization::

> * The performance of the https://docs.stackable.tech/home/stable/hdfs/usage-guide/security.html#_authorization[OPA Authorizer] has been greatly improved. This _can_ be a breaking change so please make sure to read the hdfs-utils https://github.com/stackabletech/hdfs-utils/releases/tag/v0.4.0[release notes] for details.

Author: This is rendering strangely:

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/c8040038-bedb-46c7-8067-1a231c8a0c4c)

Probably because of the `_` in the URL.

Reviewer: fixed in https://github.com/stackabletech/documentation/pull/679/commits/dde6742af142063add32d068e607b85cfc86086a

* The User Info Fetcher HTTP API has been replaced with a Rego library. Please see https://docs.stackable.tech/home/nightly/opa/usage-guide/user-info-fetcher#_user_info_fetcher_api[user-info-fetcher API] for more information.

Logging::

* Apache NiFi: The ephemeral EmptyDir Volumes used to store log files before being aggregated have their size increased from a default of 33 MiB to 500 MiB. Additionally the interval in which Logback checks if the maximum log file size has been reached was lowered from 60 seconds to 5 seconds.

Monitoring::

> * In SDP 24.7 we upgraded the version of [JMX Exporter](https://github.com/prometheus/jmx_exporter) from 0.20 to 1.0.1. This is the tool which allows us to expose JMX metrics in Prometheus and is in use for Hadoop, HBase, Hive, Kafka, Spark, Trino and ZooKeeper. Unfortunately the version 1.0.1 has a severe performance degradation which has been [fixed upstream](https://github.com/prometheus/jmx_exporter/pull/1009) but is not yet released. This SDP release 24.11 contains a fixed version bringing performance back to normal levels.

Author: As much as we'd love it to be Markdown, it is not yet... :smile: 

```suggestion
* In SDP 24.7 we upgraded the version of https://github.com/prometheus/jmx_exporter[JMX Exporter] from 0.20 to 1.0.1. This is the tool which allows us to expose JMX metrics in Prometheus and is in use for Hadoop, HBase, Hive, Kafka, Spark, Trino and ZooKeeper. Unfortunately the version 1.0.1 has a severe performance degradation which has been https://github.com/prometheus/jmx_exporter/pull/1009[fixed upstream] but is not yet released. This SDP release 24.11 contains a fixed version bringing performance back to normal levels.
```

Author: I'd probably reword it to move the "what JMX is" to the start, and then what the consequence is...

```suggestion
* https://github.com/prometheus/jmx_exporter[JMX Exporter] is a tool which allows us to expose JMX metrics as Prometheus metrics. It is used by the following products: Hadoop, HBase, Hive, Kafka, Spark, Trino and ZooKeeper. In the previous SDP release (24.7) we upgraded JMX Exporter from 0.20 to 1.0.1. Unfortunately version 1.0.1 has a severe performance degradation which has been https://github.com/prometheus/jmx_exporter/pull/1009[fixed upstream] but is not yet released. This SDP release 24.11 contains a fixed version bringing performance back to normal levels.
```

Security::

* The Stackable Data Platform now supports provisioning TLS certificates using cert-manager.

> * Added support for customizing sAMAccountName generation in secret operator.

Author: ```suggestion
* Added support for customizing `sAMAccountName` generation in secret operator.
```

* The Stackable Secret Operator now requests permission to read Listeners, which is required to provision secrets for listener volumes with `listeners.stackable.tech/listener-name`.

Commons::

* Pod Enrichment is now deprecated, and will be removed in the next release. Once removed, the SDP will no longer set any `enrichment.stackable.tech/` annotations on Pods.

Listener::

* The Stackable Operator for Kafka now uses the Stackable Listener Operator, allowing connectivity to be customized.
* The `ListenerClass.spec.serviceAnnotations` are now correctly propagated to created Service objects.

> * Listeners can now be configured to use either IP addresses or DNS hostnames.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Listeners can now be configured to use either IP addresses or domain names.
```

Author: I think hostname is more specific than a domain name (which is more like the suffix of a _domain_).
I think the original was more correct.

Maybe we need a third opinion to seal the deal?

Reviewer: I think just `hostnames` would suffice?

Author: ```suggestion
* Listeners can now be configured to use either IP addresses or fully qualified domain names (FQDNs).
```

Dependencies::

> * Apache HBase: The hadoop-azure module was added to the image and is contained in the classpath. This makes it possible to use the Azure Data Lake Storage Gen2 (ADLS) instead of HDFS. See the usage guide for detailed information. 

Reviewer 5: We should add a link to the usage guide here:

```suggestion
* Apache HBase: The hadoop-azure module was added to the image and is contained in the classpath. This makes it possible to use the Azure Data Lake Storage Gen2 (ADLS) instead of HDFS. See the xref:hbase:usage-guide/adls.adoc[usage guide] for detailed information.
```

Operations::

> * The Stackable Operator for HDFS now supports upgrading existing HDFS installations. This process requires some manual intervention, however.

Reviewer 5: We should either add an (excerpt) of the manual steps required, or link to them.

Reviewer: done https://github.com/stackabletech/documentation/pull/679/commits/e70d4807a0ea5c40941ab56bce82d40a6138277c. 
We have some urls now pointing to "nightly".

Misc::

> * Apache NiFi: permit users to configure allowed hosts when NiFi is running behind a proxy. The proxy host check is now turned off by default. See documentation https://docs.stackable.tech/home/nightly/nifi/usage_guide/security#host-header-check[here].

Reviewer 5: Slightly adjust wording, add xref link.

```suggestion
* Apache NiFi: Permit users to configure allowed hosts when NiFi is running behind a proxy. The proxy host check is disabled by default. See documentation xref:nifi:usage_guide/security#host-header-check[here].
```

Note: We should also rename `usage_guide` to `usage-guide` to be in line with newer conventions and other operators.

Author: Maybe the above suggestion still needs _now_.

I also separated sentences by newlines.

```suggestion
* Apache NiFi: Permit users to configure allowed hosts when NiFi is running behind a proxy.
  The proxy host check is now disabled by default.
  See documentation xref:nifi:usage_guide/security#host-header-check[here].
```

> * Apache Airflow: Allow custom arbitrary python code in webserver_config.py.
> * Apache Superset: Allow custom arbitrary python code in superset_config.py

Author: I _think_ these should be formatted as inline code:

```suggestion
* Apache Airflow: Allow custom arbitrary python code in `webserver_config.py`.
* Apache Superset: Allow custom arbitrary python code in `superset_config.py`.
```

* The size of the operator deployed CRDs was reduced significantly https://github.com/stackabletech/issues/issues/627[here].

Images::

* Our Docker images now exclusively make use of numeric user IDs in `USER` statements allowing the use of `securityContext.runAsNonRoot`

> * The group id of all files relevant to our products is now set to `0`. This allows the images to be used with any arbitrary user as every container user will always belong to the root group (`0`). This is especially useful on OpenShift when trying to move to the `restricted-v2` SecurityContextConstraint (SCC), Stackable currently defaults to the `nonroot-v2` SCC but we plan on migrating to `restricted-v2` in the future

Author: I'd argue that the change is _required_ for moving to the `restricted-v2` SCC.
Add punkt, and split sentences to new lines.

```suggestion
* The group id of all files relevant to our products is now set to `0`.
  This allows the images to be run with an arbitrary user as every container user will always belong to the root group (`0`).
  This is required on OpenShift when migrating to the `restricted-v2` SecurityContextConstraint (SCC).
  Stackable currently defaults to the `nonroot-v2` SCC but we plan on migrating to the `restricted-v2` SCC in the future.
```

Also, is this statement true?

>   This allows the images to be run with an arbitrary user as every container user will always belong to the root group (`0`).

Reviewer: pinging @lfrancke, came from here https://github.com/stackabletech/docker-images/pull/849#issuecomment-2414847380

Reviewer 6: That statement is true, yeah.

Author: I'm curious how an arbitrary user is automatically part of the root group. Is that just for our images, or from some external base image? Or part of docker?

Author: Ok, we'll leave the docs as they are.

* Apache Hive: https://github.com/stackabletech/hive-operator/pull/508[4.0.0 (experimental)]
* Apache Kafka: https://github.com/stackabletech/kafka-operator/pull/753/[3.8.0]
* Apache NiFi: https://github.com/stackabletech/nifi-operator/pull/702[2.0.0 (experimental)]
* Open Policy Agent: https://github.com/stackabletech/opa-operator/pull/616[0.67.1]
* Trino: https://github.com/stackabletech/trino-operator/pull/638[455]
* Apache Spark: https://github.com/stackabletech/spark-k8s-operator/pull/459[3.5.2 (LTS)]

==== Deprecated versions

The following product versions are deprecated and will be removed in a later release:

* Apache Airflow: 2.9.2
* Apache Druid: 26.0.0
* Open Policy Agent: 0.66.0

==== Removed versions

The following product versions are no longer supported (although images for released product versions remain available https://repo.stackable.tech/#browse/browse:docker:v2%2Fstackable[here]):

* Apache Airflow: 2.8.4, 2.8.1, 2.6.3
* Apache Druid: 28.0.1
* Apache Kafka: 3.6.2, 3.6.1, 3.4.1
* Apache NiFi: 2.0.0-M4, 1.25.0, 1.21.0
* Open Policy Agent: 0.61.0
* Trino: 442, 414
* Apache Spark: 3.4.3, 3.4.2
* Apache Superset: 3.1.3, 3.1.0, 2.1.3
* Apache ZooKeeper: 3.8.4

> === stackablectl

Reviewer 5: We can add additional items here, as stackablectl-24.11.1 was released.

> We now provide additional completions for Nushell and Elvish, support using SOCK5 and HTTP proxies, and improved the sorting of release versions.

See:

https://github.com/stackabletech/stackable-cockpit/pull/328
https://github.com/stackabletech/stackable-cockpit/pull/336
https://github.com/stackabletech/stackable-cockpit/pull/337

Reviewer: Thanks done in https://github.com/stackabletech/documentation/pull/679/commits/0a3701dcbfe0f89fd3dad06c89a2ff04613197ca. Still unsure about mentioning the PRs or not... 
Will consolidate in the end.

Author: I think it is ok to link the PR if the desciption has useful information for end users.

But ideally, we want to just refer to the changelog (which links the PRs) and have automated changelogs (see https://github.com/stackabletech/decisions/issues/9).

Author: As discussed on a call, we will not link the PRs.

=== Upgrade from 24.7

==== Using stackablectl

Uninstall the `24.7` release

[source,console]
----
$ stackablectl release uninstall 24.7

Uninstalled release '24.7'

Use "stackablectl release list" to list available releases.
# ...
----

Afterwards you will need to upgrade the CustomResourceDefinitions (CRDs) installed by the Stackable Platform.
The reason for this is that helm will uninstall the operators but not the CRDs. This can be done using `kubectl replace`.

[source]
----
kubectl replace -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/stackabletech/airflow-operator/24.11.0/deploy/helm/airflow-operator/crds/crds.yaml
kubectl replace -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/stackabletech/commons-operator/24.11.0/deploy/helm/commons-operator/crds/crds.yaml
kubectl replace -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/stackabletech/druid-operator/24.11.0/deploy/helm/druid-operator/crds/crds.yaml
kubectl replace -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/stackabletech/hbase-operator/24.11.0/deploy/helm/hbase-operator/crds/crds.yaml
kubectl replace -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/stackabletech/hdfs-operator/24.11.0/deploy/helm/hdfs-operator/crds/crds.yaml

> kubectl replace -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/stackabletech/hello-world-operator/24.11.0/deploy/helm/hello-world-operator/crds/crds.yaml

Author: Do we want to normally deploy hello-world-operator? maybe this can go? (same for in the Helm section below)

Author: We're thinking we should remove mentions of hello-world operator and product from release notes.

_Reiterating it in hopes that the above comment is no longer hidden_

Author: Done in 0141616

helm install --wait hbase-operator stackable-stable/hbase-operator --version 24.11.0
helm install --wait hdfs-operator stackable-stable/hdfs-operator --version 24.11.0
helm install --wait hive-operator stackable-stable/hive-operator --version 24.11.0
helm install --wait kafka-operator stackable-stable/kafka-operator --version 24.11.0
helm install --wait listener-operator stackable-stable/listener-operator --version 24.11.0
helm install --wait hello-world-operator stackable-stable/hello-world-operator --version 24.11.0
helm install --wait nifi-operator stackable-stable/nifi-operator --version 24.11.0
helm install --wait opa-operator stackable-stable/opa-operator --version 24.11.0
helm install --wait secret-operator stackable-stable/secret-operator --version 24.11.0
helm install --wait spark-k8s-operator stackable-stable/spark-k8s-operator --version 24.11.0
helm install --wait superset-operator stackable-stable/superset-operator --version 24.11.0
helm install --wait trino-operator stackable-stable/trino-operator --version 24.11.0
helm install --wait zookeeper-operator stackable-stable/zookeeper-operator --version 24.11.0
----

==== Known upgrade issues

> todo: mention JMX Exporter?

> > todo: do we mention NiFi 2.0.0 (experimental)? because NiFi 1.27.0 -> 2.0.0 requires manual intervention (basically same as in the 24.7 note)

Author: Should we mention JMX and NiFi 2.0.0 (experimental) here?

Author: Also the OIDC issue that @sbernauer found.

Reviewer: I got the OIDC thing on my list, will add. Nifi 2.0.0 i would mention disabled reporting task and that the metrics endpoint it now requires authentication?

Author: Just wanted to mention that a bunch of processors have been renamed (or have different class paths), and cannot be changed from the UI.

Author: I added a comment on the updated version. Closing this.

* The group id of all files relevant to our products is now set to `0`. This allows the images to be used with any arbitrary user as every container user will always belong to the root group (`0`). This is especially useful on OpenShift when trying to move to the `restricted-v2` SecurityContextConstraint (SCC), Stackable currently defaults to the `nonroot-v2` SCC but we plan on migrating to `restricted-v2` in the future

Bug fixes::

* Apache Spark Operator: Ensure Spark applications are submitted only once. Reconciling applications after the corresponding Job objects have been recycled doesn't lead to the creation of new Job objects. This behavior was triggered by different situations, such as when the operator was restarted.
* Apache Spark Operator: Environment variables can now be overridden with the role group’s envOverrides property.
* Trino, Spark, HBase, Airflow: These used to have https://github.com/stackabletech/issues/issues/548[issues] where config and environment variable overrides would not always work as expected, this has now been fixed

> * The cluster domain (default `cluster.local`) which caused problems in non-default cluster setups can now be configured in all operators using the ENV variable `KUBERNETES_CLUSTER_DOMAIN` or setting the helm value `kubernetesClusterDomain` during installation as described https://docs.stackable.tech/home/nightly/guides/kubernetes-cluster-domain[here].

Author: ```suggestion
* The cluster domain (default `cluster.local`) which caused problems in non-default cluster setups can now be configured in all operators using the ENV variable `KUBERNETES_CLUSTER_DOMAIN` or setting the helm value `kubernetesClusterDomain` during installation as described in https://docs.stackable.tech/home/nightly/guides/kubernetes-cluster-domain[Configuring the Kubernetes cluster domain].
```

////

== Release 24.11

> === New / extended platform features

Author: Maybe this section can be about New platform features, and kept at a high level (logging, monitoring, authorization, etc..) and not operator specific stuff or fixes.

Instead, a second section can be about Improvements to the platform which can mention security/bug fixes.

Maybe headings like:

```adoc
=== New platform features

Improved Authentication::
In this release we introduced several authentication mechanisms in different products:
* Apache Airflow: https://github.com/stackabletech/airflow-operator/issues/337[OIDC support]
* Apache Kafka: https://github.com/stackabletech/kafka-operator/issues/655[Kerberos support]
* Apache NiFi: https://github.com/stackabletech/nifi-operator/issues/633[OIDC support]

...

=== Platform improvements

Vulnerabilities::
* More than 142 CVEs were fixed in the Stackable product images. This includes 11 critical and 55 high-severity CVEs.

...
```

Author: Shuffled things around in 2a43d4a741a154ae2ee4f5d799a83c1c80be1f6b

Author: We happy?

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/d44513df-1ba8-4be8-b9e1-46700434a5da)

Author: Done

Vulnerabilities::

> * More than 142 CVEs were fixed in the Stackable product images. This includes 11 critical and 55 high-severity CVEs.

Author: ```suggestion
* More than 142 CVEs were fixed in the Stackable product images.
  This includes 11 critical and 55 high-severity CVEs.
```

Security::

Support for OIDC with/without TLS has been added to Apache Druid in this release.

> * Apache Druid: 26.0.0

Author: This appears to be accidental, and would only appear in release notes from this version onwards (I think).

```suggestion
```

Security::

> Support for OIDC with/without TLS has been added to Apache Druid in this release.

Author: ```suggestion
Support for OIDC with/without TLS has been added to Apache Druid in this release.

```
